well good morning everybody and uh today
we're going to talk about star colors
this is a lecture that I've prepared for
the Cambridge Astro plus series but I
thought I would do a recording of it and
share it with everybody so I've got a
marvelous picture here of a whole lot of
stars in the Milky Way showing their
marvelous colors we've got some bright
red ones blue ones white ones faint
painter orange ones all sorts going on
in this picture and it makes a very
lovely place to start but perhaps we
ought to consider why it is that these
stars are shining at all and the reason
is because they are in fact hot and
illustrating that with a picture of some
lava over here coming out of a volcano
you can see actually different colors in
the lava you can see the uh really
bright white areas the less bright
orange colors and the Deep Reds in there
and that's telling us something about
the
temperature now in Stars they are hot
because they carry out nuclear fusion
converting hydrogen to helium in the
core and that heat eventually comes to
the surface and is radiated away as the
light we
see
so let's just have a little think about
what heat light and energy are really
all about well heat is the energy of
atoms or particles moving moving around
at high speed the faster they're moving
the higher the temperature the more
energy they have the higher the
temperature and slow moving particles
are cold
ones but light is a form of energy as
well the electromagnetic radiation in
all its forms carries a certain amount
of energy proportional to the frequency
of the light and that relates of course
the inverse of the wavelength the the
wavelength and the frequency determine
the color of the light so red light is
low energy and appears at one end of our
visible spectrum there and high energy
light appears up at the blue and violet
and if we were to go even further we
would go off into the rest of the
electromagnetic spectrum go beyond
Violet we would get to ultraviolet then
X-rays and gamma rays as we gradually
increased the energy and if we went to
lower energies than red we would first
go into the infrared and then the
microwave and radio and TV radio
frequencies down there at the very long
end of things the very low energy
side but uh everything in the universe
has a temperature and everything
therefore uh emits a certain amount of
radiation and glows so if we look at
things it's just a matter of what color
they are and the cooler they are if
they're cool things they will glow in
the infrared part of the spectrum and if
you looked at a picture of me with an
infrared camera if you happen to have
magic infrared eyes you get an image
like this you can see that my skin my
face there is radiating at a higher
temperature than my hair or my clothing
and you can also actually see that my
glasses there in the picture are
blocking the infrared radiation the
glass in the lenses there doesn't let
the infrared through to make an infrared
telescope you either use mirror
or you have to use very special glass
that will uh not cause that but
basically the color of the light the
wavelength the energy of the light is a
direct representation of the
temperature so if we look at that we got
some light bulbs here glowing at
different temperatures starting at
1,000° C you get that vague cherry red
color go up in temperature you get 2,000
you get to Red then orange at
3,000 yellow at 4,000
things go white at 6,000 and at 10,000
they go to Blue and that's rather
curious and it's because of the way that
the energy distribution comes out in the
light I've got some graphs underneath
there showing how there is a peak in the
energy that is emitted going to the
right to longer frequencies with the
visible spectrum colors red orange
yellow green blue and purple down at the
bottom there and as we have our
different light bulbs you can see that
the cherry red one actually is putting
most of its energy out below the visible
spectrum in the infrared and only a
little bit of it makes it through into
the red that's why we just see that
faint cherry red color then we go to the
red line and the peak has got brighter
it's moved up and it's also moved to the
right and at each step the peak gets
taller and the uh Mountain moves B to
the right to higher energy so you get
more light and you get light of on
average a a shorter wavelength of higher
frequency and a Bluer color until in
fact the uh blue hot light bulb there is
putting out light Beyond into the
ultraviolet part of the region as well
which the uh really cool ones really
don't put much out at all there so if we
look at some Stars we've got a number of
uh famous stars here and they each show
those different colors the red orange
yellow white and blue of antaris there
surface temperature around about the
3,000 Mark Arcturus a little bit
hotter the sun 5,800 de so in that
yellow range of 6,000 to 5,000 that it
has marked on the screen for you Vega in
the constellation of Lyra a white star
around about 10,000 and SP sper in Virgo
very much a blue star with a temperature
well up into the teens they're getting
on for 20,000 so a very very hot star
indeed and they show those those colors
you can see that with the naked eye but
we can relate the color and the
temperature and the power output and the
mass all together so if we plot them
according to their power output and
their temperature we can see that we get
a nice parade here with the small red
dwarf stars down there at the bottom on
the left not much power coming from them
low temperature and then uh we go up
through the colors again to uh more
powerful stars and their power relates
to their mass at least this is true for
the majority of stars the so-called main
sequence Stars the ones that are burning
hydrogen to helium by nuclear fusion in
their CES things are a bit different for
some other types of stars but if we
choose to put this onto uh more
professional looking diagram I like this
one it's called the Hertz sprung Russell
diagram and it combines all of these
things we have the temperature across
the bottom and this time it's the other
way around with blue on the left but it
doesn't really matter we've got blue
through white yellow uh orange and then
down to the cool red dwarf stars on the
right and and the Luminosity the
brightness up the left hand side but
that also correlates with their mass as
we've already learned so you see the
main sequence stars are the ones
diagonally down from top left to bottom
right going through those same colors
and mass ranges and you can see that
we've got the mass numbers written on
there so at the top left there is saying
60 M Sun that's 60 times the solar mass
the sun is labeled there down in the
center um and also labeled on there
we've got the lifetimes in green where
it says uh lifetime 10 to the power 7
years um so this is a very long lived
star but they get even longer as they
move down down to 10 to the 11 down
there at the bottom right for an orange
star we'll say more about that in a
moment and then you have the peculiar
odd balls which are the Giants the super
Giants up there at the top right where
something different is going on these
are older stars or more aged stars that
have gone through the main sequence
process run out of ability to do nuclear
fusion of hydrogen in their cores and
have changed their balance of forces
swelled up into a much larger star in
terms of size much less lower density of
course um but they have gone on in some
cases to start carrying out further
nuclear fusion reactions with helium
going to carbon um and other elements
further up and then we have the dead
stars the white dwarf stars this is what
happens to sunlike Stars at the end of
their life they will go through the red
giant phase and then become white dwarfs
we'll see more about that in a moment as
well and they appear down towards the
bottom left of the diagram so it's a
very useful way of classifying things
but if I have a little look at a
slightly simplified
diagram this one here shows the
time along the bottom axis and the mass
or the temperature or the burn rate
because big stars live fast and die
young big stars massive stars have more
fuel because they have more mass but
they burn it at a tremendous rate they
burn through it much more rapidly and
that's disproportionate so that the uh
lifetime of the star is very much
shorter so what we have here is these
Columns of stars with the different
colors and each column represents a
factor of 10 in lifetime so what we have
is that the largest the deep blue star
at the top There lives for about 1
million years that First Column
corresponds to 1 million years and then
it will explode as a super NOA by the
time you get to the second column so
I've indicated that with a little
picture of the Crab Nebula there a
supernova
Remnant one row below the blue white
slightly smaller Stars they will live
one billion sorry 1 million and then 10
million in the second column and then
die as a supernova so there's two
columns for them the white stars manage
three columns that's 110
100 million years before they
explode the cooler ftype yellowy white
stars there they manage four columns so
that's 1 billion years four steps of 10
on my diagram and then they die but this
time they don't die as a supernova they
die a more gentle death forming what's
called a planetary nebula where they
just puff off their outer layers rather
than detonating as a supernova now a
yellow sunlike
that will manage to go five columns so
that's 1 million 10 million 100 million
a billion and then 10 billion years and
our sun is about halfway through that so
actually on this chart it would be
between
the fourth and fifth of the yellow dots
there making its way along and it's when
it gets to 10 billion that's it it will
run out of fuel and also form one of
these exploding um uh planetary nebula
where the outer layers are puffed off as
a smoke ring in
space now the bottom two rows we have
the yellow dwarfs for the sun we then
have the orange dwarfs where there are
in fact six dots on my diagram these
will live 10 times longer than the Sun
so they will live a hundred billion
years and what you might notice is that
they uh will live longer than the age of
the universe in fact so no orange dwarf
star has been formed and has never run
out of fuel and died yet so I haven't
put a planetary nebula there we are not
absolutely certain because we've never
had a chance to observe it but we think
that that's what will happen they will
puff off their outer layers in the same
process but it's never been observed and
of course the red dwarf stars we've got
seven dots they live a trillion years
way longer than the current age of the
universe and the same thing applies so
if you think about it if you form a
whole lot of stars in a galaxy um then
the uh M Mass mix you get has a lot of
small stars and a fewer big stars it's
harder for nature to make the big ones
and so we end up with this mixture but
very rapidly the big bright blue and
white stars die out detonating as supern
noi and leave behind the longer lived
yellow orange and red stars so gradually
over time the blue color of a galaxy
dominated by the really bright light
from the super massive stars will fade
and die and it leaves behind a yellow
orange red mixture down at the bottom
there and so Galaxy Star populations
gradually evolve towards becoming redder
and redder unless of course they're
continuing to form new generations of
stars and that's true at the moment in
the current universe as we obser OB it
lots of new stars are being formed out
in the spiral arms so out there we see
the color being blue dominated by the
real powerhouses at the top of the
diagram whereas where star formation has
already gone past its peak and has
slowed right down in the core of the
Galaxy things look a lot more yellow
orange and red in there as the powerful
stars have gone through their life and
died and no new ones been formed to
replace them so tells us an awful lot
when we see the color of a star we we
kind of need to know whether it's a
dwarf star a main sequence star carrying
out nuclear fusion to place it on this
diagram because as I said the giant
Stars behave slightly differently with
them blowing up and swelling to this
much larger size um they are less dense
and the surfaces become much cooler so
we end up with these red giants in a lot
of cases um and so they can be massive
but uh cool and so they are rather
different however what we should really
have a look at is what are we talking
about with this word color what is it
anyway well color is an artifact of the
brain in fact uh it's not actually just
a measure of the wavelength of the light
the frequency the energy of the light if
I plot a diagram here I've got three
circles overlapping red green and blue
and there are in fact only three colors
entering your eye from the screen at the
moment red green and blue where we have
them overlapping you see the yellow
magenta and cyan and right in the center
you see white but there really are only
three different wavelengths of light
being emitted from the screen and your
brain interprets the mixture of colors
as the secondary colors or indeed if
there's an equal mixture of all three
primary colors that it detects then it
sees white and so you can get all the
colors that are represented on this
enormous Circle here showing every
possible uh combination of red green and
blue in different
fractions spread out like that but
really really it is only the three
colors that are leaving the screen and
our brain is then interpreting those to
produce this uh wonderful um
combination so this is all done by the
eye and the brain so let's have a little
look 550 million years ago in the
Cambrian explosion of life when complex
life first began the uh eye appeared
pretty rapidly it's obviously a huge
advantage to be able to see where you're
going and these guys the trilobites were
the first creatures to be able to see
and have a working eye and they managed
to therefore dominate the uh Seas at
that time for hundreds of millions of
years in fact because this was such an
advantage to them uh compared to all the
other life forms that were around them
but we know now from biology that the
eye has evolved separately independently
quite uh separate different paths have
come 40 times to produce different form
of eyes and that we know that it doesn't
take actually very long to go from a
simple life sensitive sorry light
sensitive patch of skin to a fully
developed form of an eye we've got the
little furry squirrel there with his eye
very similar to ours we got a nautilus
there a much more ancient creature with
a a simpler eye it's a pinhole so no
lens there just a pinhole letting the
light go in and fall to the back of the
eye
and then flies with their individual
array of 3 to 6,000 compound cells that
are detecting light forming a compound
eye a completely different way of doing
it but if we look at our furry squirrel
or indeed a human eye then we find that
it's a fully evolved camera and you can
see the sort of stages that it seems
that Evolution takes from a
photosensitive patch connected to some
nerves leading to the brain on the
surface just simply detecting that
there's light on one side of the
creature and not the other perhaps to a
depression an orifice going inwards with
light sensitive surfaces and that's able
to give a bit more directionality to
tell whether or not the light is coming
from above or below perhaps or to the
left or to the right um and then
gradually that uh can close over and
form a pinhole as we have with the
Nautilus where you have the pinhole
managing to create an image of the
outside world onto the light sensitive
cells and with a bundle of nerves
individually catching the signals from
all of those uh separate parts of the um
simple light sensitive area the Proto
retina then you can begin to have the
brain compute an image and understand
what's going on now the next stage
obviously is to uh close off the hole
and protect it from dirt getting in um
and then indeed to form an image forming
lens so that you can do a better job uh
in low light conditions because a
pinhole doesn't let very much light
through but a lens can produce an image
with an enlarged aperture and therefore
be more sensitive to light so it seems
that uh the process seems to go through
these stages and we see this in uh
different evolutionary branches of the
family tree of life
now in terms of the cells that are
picking up the light at the back of the
eye we have in the human eye rods and
cones there's a electron micrograph on
the left there showing the tall thin
rods and the uh rounded cone cells there
less of
them and the human eye has a large
number of these 125 million Rod cells
and about million of the cone cells and
they're distributed in a pattern across
the back of the eye um the rod cells are
very sensitive but only pick up black
and
white they they detect light or no light
and the level of it and that's it and
that's uh great because they're very
sensitive because it doesn't matter
which color the light is they'll still
work whereas the cone cells are specific
they have proteins in them that only
pick up particular wavelengths for the
three different primary colors and this
is where our color vision comes from and
why we see three main colors because we
have three types of cone cells so if we
have a little look at the pattern that
they're distributed across the back of
the retina you can see that there is a
mixture of red green and blue cone cells
shown by that dotted pattern there are a
lot more red cells
than green cells and there are hardly
any blue ones uh this is because the
energy in those blue photons that are
coming into the eye is greater and so
it's easier to excite the uh blue cells
we don't need quite so many of them the
red cells with the low energy light need
the most and we have more of them for
that reason in order to try to balance
the
colors and we also have them only at the
center of of the uh back of the eyeball
there's a particularly uh favorite spot
called the Favia near the middle at the
back not where the optic nerve leaves
that's actually a blind spot but the the
middle part of the eye has the color
vision and the rest of it is only the
black and white vision and this may be
surprising because you think that you're
seeing the entire image around you in
color but your brain is cheating it's
lying to you you can see in that um
graph at the top there that there are
hardly any cone cells anywhere but that
Central peak in the middle there shown
by the red Spike whereas these
peripheral parts of your eye off axis
are dominated by the black and white
cone
cells and uh that's important for our
vision because
uh means that we can see uh things
moving out in the peripheral regions
just by the change in Li intensity and
what the brain does is then flick your
eye to that movement grabs a color image
of that piece of the uh uh visual field
and remembers the colors and then
stitches all the color images on top of
all the black and white together to
present the view that you actually think
you see and this is responsible for a
lot of things like magic tricks and
optical illusions where the brain gets
it
wrong so going back to Stars one thing
that's missing is there are in fact no
green stars in the uh gamut of all of
the possible colors of stars we have red
ones orange
ones Yellow Ones white ones and blue
ones but there are no green ones and
this is curious because I told you that
the peak of the light moves up through
the Spectrum so the question is why
doesn't it peak in the green and we see
a star with a green color well let's
have a look at it
as we know as we change the temperature
things move from glowing in the infrared
heat radiation up as we get them to
1,000 deg they go to that cherry red
color and so once they reach that and
start getting enough energy to put out
the the red visible light the spectrum
of the light will just contain that red
light that's the peak moving to the
right on the diagram moving to higher
energies and just getting into the
visible part of the
spectrum heated it a bit more and we get
some orange light comes in the
uh Peak moves up and to the right it
gets brighter and a little bit of the
light comes out into the orange just
squeaking into the bottom end of yellow
there and so we've now got a mixture of
red light and orange light keep going we
add some yellow and it's just sneaking
into the green there on the diagram so
we've now got a mixture of red orange
yellow and green uh green photons
arriving in the
eye keep going we add some green into
the mix and just stop at the end of the
blue there so this is a star rather like
the sun perhaps getting up to being a
hotter star we got that higher energy
green light coming in but you got to
remember that all of the colors are
still there we've still got the red the
orange the yellow and the green photons
all arriving into the uh star at the
same
time so what happens is that when the
star is glowing very coolly in the uh
invisible part perhaps a a very low mass
star a brown dwarf star something like
that it gives off infrared radiation get
it hot enough it glows red and we see
red keep going we get red and orange and
so the brain sees those as a mixture and
comes up with the answer that the star
is an orangey red color add some yellow
into the mix we've now got red and
orange and yellow but red and yellow add
together in our brains to make more
orange so we see orange plus orange the
star is an orange star at this point
even though the highest energy photons
are coming through is yellow but they
mixed with those others and this is the
key point when we add some green in
there now what we've got
is red plus green making yellow if you
look at our uh overlapping circles
diagram where red and green overlap we
get
yellow and so we've actually got yellow
plus yellow plus a bit of orange and so
essentially this star comes out as an a
yellow star so it isn't green even
though the highest energy light is green
because it's mixed with the others our
brain sees that and tells us that the
answer is yellow and if you keep going
you get all of those colors red orange
yellow green and now blue and now the
red the green and the blue can be added
together and they give us white and so
when the peak of the uh colors go into
the into the blue part of the spectrum
all the colors are now present we see
the star as
white and if you keep going right up to
the very hot Stars you start adding in
the strong blues and the Violet colors
and that tinges the white color through
Into the Blue end of things with the
brightness being right up at the top
there in the blue area of the the uh
Power output and so the star turns blue
but at no stage can you get green on its
own not mixed with the other color
uh you will either get it mixed with the
Reds and yellows and the orange color
light and see it as yellow or there will
be some blue there and it will move and
become a white
star so sadly we just don't get to see
any green stars at all and uh really
that was the point of uh this particular
uh presentation and so I hope you've
enjoyed that and we'll see you next time